Ann Meekitjuk Hanson
"Ann Hanson" redirects here. For other uses, see Ann Hanson (disambiguation).
Ann Meekitjuk Hanson3rd Commissioner of Nunavut
In office
April 21, 2005 – April 10, 2010
Prime Minister
Paul Martin
Stephen Harper
Premier
Paul Okalik
Eva Aariak
Preceded by
Peter Irniq
Succeeded by
Nellie KusugakPersonal details
Born
(1946-05-22) May 22, 1946 (age 71)
Qakutut, Northwest Territories[1]
Spouse(s)
Robert Hanson
Occupation
civil servant, broadcaster, journalist and author
Ann Meekitjuk Hanson (Inuktitut: ᐋᓐ ᒦᖀᑦᔩᒃ ᐦᐋᓐᓱᓐ/an miiqitjuk hansun) (born May 22, 1946, Qaktut, Northwest Territories, now Nunavut[1]) was the Commissioner of Nunavut. She served from April 21, 2005 until April 10, 2010.[2] Hanson, like all Inuit born between the 1940s and the 1970s, was labelled with a disc number by the Government of Canada, which, in her case was E7-121.[3]
She spent the first 11 years of her life speaking only Inuktitut and living in Qakutut and Kimmirut. She attended schools in Iqaluit, Baker Lake (Qamanituaq), and Toronto, where she was known as Annie Cotterill.[3] She studied community development at Saint Francis Xavier University, geography at the University of Windsor and received a diploma with honors in journalism from Nunavut Arctic College.
Hanson's career has been diverse. She has been a civil servant, broadcaster, journalist and author.[1] She has used her skills in Inuktitut throughout her career. Joining the federal government in 1964, she served as a secretary and interpreter/translator in the office of Northwest Territories MP Eugène Rhéaume.
She joined the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation as a receptionist, later becoming an announcer and producer in Inuktitut broadcasting. Hanson was the first editor of the Iqaluit community newspaper Inukshuk, which later became Nunatsiaq News. She is the author of Show Me, a book written in Inuktitut and English.
In addition to her work in journalism, Hanson also served with the government of the Northwest Territories as a community development worker, counsellor and deputy commissioner.
Hanson has spent considerable time as a volunteer, helping to start a number of organizations in Iqaluit. These organizations include the Juvenile Court Committee, the Elders Group, the Inuit Cultural Group, and the Quinuajuaq Society.
Hanson lives in Iqaluit with her husband, Robert Hanson. They have five grown daughters.
Arms[edit]Coat of arms of Ann Meekitjuk Hanson
Notes
The arms of Ann Meekitjuk Hanson, presented on a roundel rather than the escutcheon shape traditional in European heraldry, consist of:[4]
Crest
Issuant from five purple saxifrage flowers, a rock ptarmigan wings elevated and addorsed proper.
Escutcheon
Purpure a qulliq Argent enflamed Or.
Supporters
Dexter the figure of Sedna proper vested Or queued Argent, sinister a ring seal proper.
Compartment
Barry wavy Purpure and Argent flanking a mount of tundra proper.
Motto
Co-Operation Enhances Peace (In English and in Inuktitut)
See also[edit]Notable Aboriginal people of CanadaReferences[edit]
^ a b c Snyder, Lorraine (2009). "Hanson, Ann Meekitjuk". The Canadian Encyclopedia > Biography > Commissioners. Historica-Dominion. Archived from the original on 2011-06-08. Retrieved 2009-10-03. 
^ New Nunavut commissioner to be named soon
^ a b What's In A Name? by Ann Meekitjuk Hanson
^ Canadian Heraldic Authority (Volume V), Ottawa, 2007, p. 146 
Preceded by
Peter Irniq
Commissioner of Nunavut
2005-2010
Succeeded by
Nellie Kusugak
(acting)
v
t
e
Commissioners of Nunavut
Maksagak
Irniq
Hanson
(Kusugak)
Elias
Kusugak
v
t
e
Heads of State for the Northwest TerritoriesCommissioner 1905–presentWhite
Cory
Rowatt
Camsell
Keenleyside
Young
Robertson
Sivertz
Hodgson
Parker
Norris
Maksagak
Marion
Hansen
Whitford
Tuccaro
Thom
Deputy Commissioner 1921–presentGibson
Cunningham
Brown
Hodgson
Parker
Pilot
Semmler
Hanson
Maksagak
Marion
Mains
Whitford
Thom
KisounLieutenant Governor 1870–1905McDougall
Archibald
Johnson
Morris
Laird
Dewdney
Royal
Mackintosh
Cameron
Forget
Categories: 1946 birthsLiving peopleCommissioners of NunavutInuit politiciansWriters from the Northwest TerritoriesWriters from NunavutWomen in Nunavut politicsInuit writersNorthwest Territories Deputy CommissionersCanadian Inuit women