Corn flakes
Corn flakes
Corn flakesPlace of origin
United States
Region or state
Battle Creek Sanitarium in Michigan
Created by
John Harvey Kellogg (1894)
W.K. Kellogg
Main ingredients
Milled corn, sugar, malt flavoring
Variations
multiple
 Cookbook: Corn flakes   Media: Corn flakes
Corn flakes, or cornflakes, are a breakfast cereal made by toasting flakes of cereal, usually maize (known as corn in the U.S.). The cereal was created by John Harvey Kellogg in 1894 as a food that he thought would be healthy for the patients of the Battle Creek Sanitarium in Michigan where he was superintendent. The breakfast cereal proved popular among the patients and the Kellogg Company (Kellogg's) was set up to produce corn flakes for the wider public. A patent for the process was granted in 1896.
With corn flakes becoming popular in the wider community, a previous patient at the sanitarium, C. W. Post, started to make rival products. Kellogg continued to experiment and various ingredients were added and different grains were used. In 1928, he started to manufacture Rice Krispies, another successful breakfast cereal.
There are many generic brands of corn flakes produced by various manufacturers. As well as being used as a breakfast cereal, the crushed flakes can be a substitute for bread crumbs in recipes and can be incorporated into many cooked dishes.Contents
1 Description
2 History
3 Similar cereals
4 In cooking
5 Images
6 See also
7 References
8 External linksDescription[edit]
Corn flakes are a packaged cereal product formed from small toasted flakes of maize, usually served cold with milk and sometimes sugar. Since their original production, the plain flakes have been flavoured with salt, sugar and malt, and many successive products with additional ingredients have been manufactured such as sugar frosted flakes and honey & nut corn flakes.[1] Corn flakes are produced in significant quantities at the Trafford Park factory in Manchester, England, which is the largest cereal factory in the world.[2]
History[edit]
Advertisement for Kellogg's Toasted Corn Flakes from the July 21, 1910 issue of Life magazine.
The story of corn flakes goes back to the late 19th century, when a team of Seventh-day Adventists began to develop new foods to adhere to the vegetarian diet recommended by the church. Members of the group experimented with a number of different grains, including wheat, oats, rice, barley and maize. In 1894, John Harvey Kellogg, the superintendent of the Battle Creek Sanitarium in Michigan and an Adventist, used these recipes as part of a strict vegetarian regimen for his patients, which also included no alcohol, tobacco or caffeine. The diet he imposed consisted entirely of bland foods. A follower of Sylvester Graham, the inventor of graham crackers and graham bread, Kellogg believed that spicy or sweet foods would increase passions.[3]
This idea for corn flakes began by accident when Kellogg and his younger brother, Will Keith Kellogg, left some cooked wheat to sit while they attended to some pressing matters at the sanitarium. When they returned, they found that the wheat had gone stale, but being on a strict budget, they decided to continue to process it by forcing it through rollers, hoping to obtain long sheets of the dough. To their surprise, what they found instead were flakes, which they toasted and served to their patients. This event occurred on August 8, 1894, and a patent for "Flaked Cereals and Process of Preparing Same" was filed on May 31, 1895, and issued on April 14, 1896.[4][5][6]
A newspaper advertisement for Kellogg's Toasted Corn Flakes in 1919.
Dr Kellogg introduced Kellogg's Corn Flakes in hopes that it would reduce dyspepsia and, in accordance with the practices of the Seventh-day Adventists, masturbation and excessive sexual intercourse.[7]
The flakes of grain, which the Kellogg brothers called granose, were a very popular food among the patients. The brothers then experimented with other flakes from other grains. In 1906, Will Keith Kellogg, who served as the business manager of the sanitarium, decided to try to mass-market the new food. At his new company, Battle Creek Toasted Corn Flake Company, he added sugar to the flakes to make them more palatable to a mass audience, but this caused a rift between his brother and him. In 1907, his same company ran an ad campaign which offered a free box of cereal to any woman who winked at her grocer.[8] To increase sales, in 1909 he added a special offer, the Funny Jungleland Moving Pictures Booklet, which was made available to anyone who bought two boxes of the cereal. This same premium was offered for 22 years. At the same time, Kellogg also began experimenting with new grain cereals to expand his product line. Rice Krispies, his next great hit, first went on sale in 1928.[9]
There have been many mascots of Kellogg's Cornflakes. The most popular one is a green rooster named Cornelius "Corny" Rooster, which has been the mascot since his debut. In early commercials, he would speak the catch phrase "Wake up, up, up to Kellogg's Cornflakes!" Dallas McKennon and Andy Devine voiced him. Later, he stopped talking and simply crowed.[citation needed] The concept of using a stylized cockerel originated from a suggestion by family friend Nansi Richards, a harpist from Wales and a Welsh language proponent. The Welsh word for cockerel is ceiliog (pronounced keyeleeog or in some dialects keelog).[10][11]
Similar cereals[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)A former patient of the Battle Creek Sanitarium, C. W. Post, started a rival company to create the other major brand of corn flakes in the United States, Post Toasties or Elijah's Manna. The Australian company Sanitarium Health and Wellbeing also manufactures their own brand of corn flakes called Skippy corn flakes. Many generic brands of corn flakes are produced by various manufacturers. In addition, Sainsbury's, Tesco, Morrisons, Asda Co-operative, etc. have brought out similar products based on cornflakes. A variety of corn flakes that is sold in the United Kingdom is one where honey and nuts have been added to the corn flakes, colloquially as "honey nut corn flakes" and as Crunchy Nut under the Kellogg's brand name.
In cooking[edit]
There are a wide variety of different recipes for dishes involving corn flakes and crushed corn flakes can even be a substitute for bread crumbs.
Honey joys are a popular party snack in Australia. They are made by mixing corn flakes with honey, butter and sugar and baking in patty cases or muffin cups.[12] A variant popular in the UK is chocolate corn flake cakes, made with corn flakes, dark chocolate, golden syrup and butter.[13] In New Zealand, corn flakes are a core ingredient in Afghan biscuits, a chocolate cookie made with corn flakes and topped with chocolate icing.[14]
Images[edit]Corn flakes are usually served with cold milk (but it is sometimes warm or hot). Fruit is a popular addition. Sugar may be added to taste.Corn flakes are sweetened, flavored with peanut butter and covered in compound chocolate to create the Butterfinger candy bar (and imitations).Quinoa "corn" flakes
See also[edit]
Food portalGenetically modified maize
List of maize dishes
FeuilletineReferences[edit]
^ Robert B. Fast; Elwood F. Caldwell (2000). Breakfast Cereals, and how They are Made. American Association of Cereal Chemists. ISBN 978-1-891127-15-1. 
^ "Kellogg's Fast Facts". Kellogg's. Archived from the original on December 4, 2010. Retrieved October 3, 2011. 
^ "Dr. John Harvey Kellogg". Archived from the original on July 12, 2007. 
^ John Harvey Kellogg, U.S. Patent no. 558,393, Flaked Cereals and Process of Preparing Same, filed May 31, 1895, issued April 14, 1896.
^ "News of the Odd, John Harvey Kellogg Serves Corn Flakes at the San (March 7, 1897)". Archived from the original on March 15, 2008. 
^ "Inventor of the Week: W.K Kellogg". mit.edu. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. 
^ Markel, Howard (July 28, 2017). "The Secret Ingredient in Kellogg's Corn Flakes Is Seventh-Day Adventism: America's favorite processed breakfast was once the pinnacle of healthfulness—and spiritual purity". Smithsonian. Retrieved November 4, 2017. 
^ "Food Facts and Trivia: Corn Flakes". foodreference.com. Retrieved 9 September 2015. 
^ "100 Years of Cornflakes" (PDF). kaplanink.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 21, 2008. 
^ "Why is there a Cockerel on the Kellog's Box (sic)". BBC Wales - History. BBC. Retrieved May 21, 2014. 
^ Davies, Glyn. "Putting the 'Ceiliog' in Corn Flakes". A view from Rural Wales. Glyn Davies (Welsh Member of Parliament). Retrieved May 21, 2014. 
^ "Honey joy recipe". Kelloggs. Retrieved 17 May 2015. 
^ "Chocolate cornflake cakes recipe". BBC. Retrieved 17 May 2015. 
^ Timothy G. Roufs, ed. (2014). Sweet Treats around the World: An Encyclopedia of Food and Culture. Retrieved 3 April 2018. 
External links[edit] Media related to Cornflakes at Wikimedia Commonsv
t
e
Kellogg'sDivisions and
brandsBear Naked
Eggo
Kashi
Gardenburger
Morningstar Farms
Nutri-Grain
Sunshine Biscuits
Products
Current
CerealsAll-Bran
Apple Jacks
Bran Buds
Coco Pops/Cocoa Krispies
Corn Flakes
Corn Pops
Complete Wheat Bran Flakes
Country Store
Crispix
Cruncheroos
Crunchy Nut
Froot Loops
Frosted Flakes/Frosties
Frosted Mini-Wheats
Fruit 'n Fibre
Honey Loops
Honey Smacks
Just Right
Krave
Mini Swirlz
Nutri-Grain
Cracklin' Oat Bran
Raisin Bran
Raisin Wheats
Rice Krispies
Smorz
Special K
StartCookies and
crackersAustin
Carr's (USA)
Cheez-It
Chips Deluxe
Club Crackers
E.L. Fudge Cookies
Famous Amos
Keebler
Mother's Cookies
Vienna Fingers
WheatablesOtherSpecial K2O Protein Water
Pop-Tarts
Pringles
Worthington
Yogos Rollers
DiscontinuedCinnamon Crunch Crispix
Disney Hunny B's Honey-Graham
Disney Mickey's Magix
Eggo Cereal
Cinnamon Mini-Buns
Pep
Product 19
Puffa Puffa Rice
Droxies
OtherJohn Harvey Kellogg
Will Keith Kellogg
W. K. Kellogg Foundation
 Category
 Commons
v
t
e
Maize and cornVarietiesBaby
Blue
Dent
Field
Flint
Flour
MON 810
MON 863
Quality Protein Maize
Shoepeg
Sweet
Genetically modified maize
Waxy
Bolivia varieties
Ecuador varieties
Italian varieties
Sweetcorn varieties
PartsCob
Kernel
StoverProcessingAmylomaize
Corn construction
Maize milling
Nixtamalization
Wet-milling
Popcorn makerPathologyBBCH-scale
Corn allergy
Maize streak virus
Maize
productionRaw materialsCornmeal
Masa
Mielie-meal
Oil
Samp
Starch
Steep liquor
SyrupBeveragesAtole
Bourbon
Champurrado
Chicha
Colada morada
Pinolillo
Pozol
Tejate
Tejuino
TesgüinoDishesArepa
Bread
Conkies
Cookie
Corn flakes
Corn on the cob
Cou-cou
Fufu
Grits
Hallaca
Hominy
Humita
Johnnycake
Kačamak
Kuymak
List of maize dishes
Mazamorra
Mămăligă
Milho Frito
Mush
Nachos
Nshima
Pamonha
Pap
Pashofa
Piki
Polenta
Popcorn
Pudding corn
Pupusa
Sadza
Sagamite
Taco
Tamale
Tortilla
UgaliCorn syrupGlucose syrup
High-fructose corn syrupPublic relations
High-maltose corn syrupNon-foodBiofuel
Cornstalk fiddleMisc.List of popcorn brands
Categories: American cuisineBreakfast cerealsKellogg Company cerealsMaize dishesProducts introduced in 1906Products introduced in 1894Hidden categories: Use mdy dates from July 2014All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from December 2013Articles needing additional references from December 2013All articles needing additional references