Doghouse
For the 2009 film, see Doghouse (film). For the No Doubt song, see Doghouse (song). For the article about shelter for dogs and cats, see Kennel. For other uses, see Doghouse (disambiguation).
A wooden doghouse.
A doghouse, dog house, dogshed or kennel is a small shed commonly built in the shape of a house, a shelter intended for a dog. It is a structure in which a dog is kept and it is intended to provide a safe place to dogs outdoors. Doghouses are also used for other pets, such as rabbits in enclosed yards.
Generally, people buy a doghouse to provide a secure and private place for their pet and protect it from various weather conditions[1]. Many materials can be used for making doghouses, such as wood, plastic, resin, and hardboard.Contents
1 Shelter
2 See also
3 References
4 External linksShelter[edit]
Doghouse
Humans often build "houses" for domestic animals, often resembling smaller versions of human domiciles. These include bird-houses, hen-houses/chicken-coops and doghouses; while housed agricultural animals more often live in barns and stables. Doghouses are often used when the dog is outdoors in the garden, and on areas around a farm where the dog guards the possessions of the owners from unwanted/unexpected people or animals. A doghouse is made of insulating material (often wood) to prevent loss of heat except for a front opening where the dog will enter. The roof is almost always waterproof material. The roof of a doghouse is built to prevent snow or rain from collecting. Often, the owner of the pet should be able to open or remove the roof.
See also[edit]Eddie's House
KennelReferences[edit]^ "Dog house". smarthomekitz.com. Smart Home Kitz. External links[edit]Wikimedia Commons has media related to Doghouses.Ron Hazelton's HouseCalls—Includes step-by-step video instructions and free blueprints for a custom doghouse.
All About Dog Houses—Information about constructing or purchasing a doghouse, the history of doghouses, doghouse terminology, and plans for a DIY doghouse.
Building a Small Dog House Includes detailed images with the construction process, as well as a list with the materials and tools needed for the project.
Eamon Aldrich: Doghouse Architect—Humorous article about a fictional celebrity doghouse architect that includes lots of interesting and detailed information about doghouse design and construction.This dog-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.
v
t
e
Categories: Buildings and structures used to confine animalsDog equipmentDog stubsHidden categories: All stub articles