Eyebrow
For other uses, see Eyebrow (disambiguation).
EyebrowA man's eyebrow and eyeDetails
Identifiers
Latin
supercilium
MeSH
D005138
TA
A15.2.07.023
A16.0.00.017
FMA
54237
Anatomical terminology
[edit on Wikidata]The eyebrow is an area of thick, delicate hairs above the eye that follows the shape of the lower margin of the brow ridges of some mammals. Their main function is to prevent sweat, water, and other debris from falling down into the eye socket, but they are also important to human communication and facial expression. It is common for people to modify their eyebrows by means of hair removal and makeup. 
Contents
1 Functions1.1 Physical
1.2 Psychological
1.3 As eyespots
2 Trends
3 Eyebrow modification
4 Gallery
5 See also
6 References
7 External linksFunctions[edit]
Physical[edit]
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)It is believed by anthropologists that the main function of the eyebrow is to prevent moisture, mostly salty sweat and rain, from flowing into the eye. Greek physician Herophilos, in his treatise "Anatomy," was among the first to hypothesize such a theory, proposing that the eyebrows are "adorned with hair, so that if copious perspiration came [down], it would be contained by this 'check-point' of hair placed in its way until it is wiped off, so that it could not obstruct the eyes." The typical curved shape of the eyebrow (with a slant on the side) and the direction in which eyebrow hairs are pointed, make sure that moisture has a tendency to flow sideways around the eyes, along the side of the head and along the nose. The slightly protruding brow ridges of modern humans could also be used as a defense structure against the floods of moisture. Desmond Morris, discussing the possible function of the eyebrow in human evolution, criticized this suggestion as non-effective [1] and suggested that the primary function of the eyebrows is to signal the changing moods of their owners. Together with the brow ridges, the eyebrows also shade the eyes from sunlight. Eyebrows also prevent debris such as dandruff and other small objects from falling into the eyes, as well as providing a more sensitive sense for detecting objects being near the eye, like small insects.
Psychological[edit]
Eyebrows have a facilitative function in communication, strengthening expressions, such as surprise or anger. The eyebrows can cause a "false facial expression", when a person's eyebrow shape appears to express an emotion that they are not experiencing.[citation needed]
As eyespots[edit]
Joseph Jordania suggested that the primary evolutionary function of clearly visible eyebrows was safety from predators during the vulnerable nighttime sleep, when early hominid groups started sleeping on the ground, away from the trees. Stealth predators (like big cats) as a rule stop hunting if they notice that prey animals are watching them. Cheap plastic masks, placed on the back of the head, saved many human lives in India and Bangladesh, where man-eating tigers claimed many victims in Sundarbans national park.[citation needed] Many predators (particularly big cats) are very sensitive to eyespots, and all the big cats have eyespots on the back of their own ears. According to Jordania, at night, when hominid eyes were closed, the eyebrows, arched upwards, and eyelashes, arched downwards, formed clearly definable oval eyespots on a ‘sleeping’ human face, creating an illusion that the eyes were still open and watching (and therefore could deter predators from attacking sleeping hominids).[2]
Trends[edit]
In the 1920s eyebrows were worn ultra thin, with a slightly pronounced curve, in order to emulate movie stars such as Clara Bow and Anna May Wong. Stars in the 1930s ditched the sloped look of the previous decade for a rounded upward bend. They also began to fill in their brows with a darker hue, emphasizing the bend. Trends remained similar until the 1960s, when Audrey Hepburn and her thick natural brows, inspired women to fill in their brows to achieve a fuller look.
Eyebrow modification[edit]
An eyebrow that has been modified via waxing
Eyebrows are a major facial feature. Cosmetic methods have been developed to alter the look of one's eyebrows, whether the goal is to add or remove hair, change the color, or change the position of the eyebrow.
Several options exist for removing hair to achieve a thinner or smaller eyebrow, or to "correct" a unibrow, including manual and electronic tweezing, waxing, and threading. The most common method is to use tweezers to thin out and shape the eyebrow. Waxing is becoming more popular.[3] Lastly, there is threading eyebrows, where a cotton thread is rolled over hair to pull it out. Small scissors are sometimes used to trim the eyebrows, either with another method of hair removal or alone. All of these methods can be painful for some seconds or minutes due to the sensitivity of the area around the eye but, often, this pain decreases over time as the individual becomes used to it. In time, hair that has been plucked will stop growing back.[4] Some people wax or shave off their eyebrows and leave them bare, stencil or draw them in with eye liner, or tattoo them on. In Western societies, it has become more common for men to pluck part of their eyebrows.
To create a fuller look, eyebrows can be cloned in an eyebrow transplant: Individual strands of the eyebrow are mimicked to create a natural-looking eyebrow of the desired shape. The process of eyebrow transplant is quite similar to the process of hair transplant. In this process as well, follicles from an active area are transferred to the area where there are no hairs so that they can get new hairs. Follicles are mostly taken from the back of the head because it is the best harvesting site when it comes to hairs. The follicles are injected to the affected area of eyebrows so people can get eyebrows according to the desires.
The healing process after an eyebrow transplant is similar to the process of tattoo. In this process, patients come across with light bruising and crusting of the skin. People who have genetically thin eyebrows or who has overtweezed are considered ideal fir the transplant.
Eyebrow brushes and shaders are used to further define the eyebrow. Other methods of achieving a fuller brow is by using brow pencils, which create an outline for the brows or mimick hairs where there are sparse areas. Brow gels are also used in creating a thicker brow; it allows for the hairs to be more textured, which gives the appearance of thicker and more fuller brows. Lastly, brow powders or even eyeshadows are used for those who want a fuller and more natural look, by placing the brow powder or eyeshadow (closest to the natural hair colour) in areas where there is less hair.
A fairly recent trend in eyebrow modification is in eyebrow tinting: Permanent dye, similar to hair colour, is used on the eyebrow, often to darken them.
An eyebrow lift, a cosmetic surgery to raise the eyebrow, usually to create a more feminine or youthful appearance, is a new phenomenon.[5] They can be affected during a face lift or an eye lift. More recently, doctors inject patients' eyebrows with botox or similar toxins to temporarily raise the eyebrow.[6]
From the 8th century, many Japanese noblewomen practiced hikimayu, shaving or plucking the eyebrow hair and painting smudge-like ones higher on the forehead. Shaving lines in eyebrows is another cosmetic alteration, more common among younger people in the 1990s and 2000s.[7]
A new trend is eyebrow tattoos. This is seen as a way to achieve and maintain an eyebrow shape, achieved by using a coil machine, rotary machine and linear machine. This process, also called cosmetic tattooing, microblading, or blade & shade brows, involves an eyebrow artist making small, precise cuts that mimic the look of hair.[8] Several celebrities have undergone the procedure, including Lorde, Lena Dunham, Adele, and Bella Thorne.[9]
Gallery[edit]Eyebrows often thicken with puberty.Eyebrows can be used to convey emotion, such as surprise.One of Audrey Hepburn's trademarks was her thick eyebrows.A young adult with hair between the eyebrows - a unibrow
See also[edit]Wikimedia Commons has media related to Eyebrows.Anti-eyebrow, a body piercing placed below the eyebrow
Eyebrow piercing, a body piercing done through the eyebrow
Trichotillomania, a disorder where sufferers have an impulse to pull out body hair, including eyebrows
Unibrow, the presence of abundant hair between the eyebrows
Eyebrow restoration, surgical procedure to change the look of one's eyebrowsReferences[edit]^ Desmond Morris, The Naked Man: A Study of the Male Body. London: Jonathan Cape, 2008
^ Joseph Jordania, Why do People Sing? Music in Human Evolution, chapter "I Can See you! Eyespots in Humans." Logos, 2011, pg. 96
^ "Eyebrow Waxing 101 - Makeup - Skin & Beauty - Daily Glow". Hair-n-skin-care.com. Retrieved 2012-06-23. 
^ "What You Should Know About Eyebrows". //www.sheilasfashionsense.com. Archived from the original on 2005-04-09. Retrieved 2012-06-23.  External link in |publisher= (help)
^ "Brow Lift Procedure Recovery, Before and After on". Medicinenet.com. Retrieved 2012-06-23. 
^ "Access". Medscape. Retrieved 2012-06-23. 
^ Bruce Ely, The Oregonian (2008-04-28). "Teens shaving lines in eyebrows raise gang concerns in schools". OregonLive.com. Retrieved 2012-06-23. 
^ https://www.inkandarch.com/single-post/2017/09/25/Blade-and-Shade-Powder-brows-Ombre-brows-what-is-the-difference
^ http://www.refinery29.com/2017/08/166333/la-eyebrow-trend-microblading-featheringExternal links[edit]IEEE Xplore: About the relationship between eyebrow movements and Fo variations
Dallas / Fort Worth Local News: Granbury ISD Forbids Eyebrow Shavingv
t
e
The orbit of the eyeBonesFrontal bone
Zygomatic bone
Maxillary bone
Sphenoid bone
Ethmoid bone
Palatine bone
Lacrimal boneMusclesSuperior rectus muscle
Inferior rectus muscle
Lateral rectus muscle
Medial rectus muscle
Superior oblique muscleTrochlea of superior oblique
Inferior oblique muscleEyelidLevator palpebrae superioris muscle
Tarsus
Medial palpebral ligament
Epicanthic fold
Meibomian gland
Ciliary glands
Eyelash
Palpebral fissure
Canthus
Gland of ZeisLacrimal apparatusKrause's glands
Lacrimal canaliculi
Lacrimal caruncle
Lacrimal gland
Lacrimal lake
Lacrimal papilla
Lacrimal punctum
Lacrimal sac
Nasolacrimal ductOtherEyebrow
ConjunctivaPlica semilunaris
Orbital septum
Periorbita
Suspensory ligament of eyeball
Tenon's capsule
v
t
e
Human hair
List of hairstyles / facial hairstylesClassification
by typeLanugo
Androgenic
Terminal
Vellusby locationNose
Ear
Eyebrow
Eyelash
Underarm
Chest
Abdominal
Pubic
Legv
t
e
Human hair colorHair colorBlack
Blond
Brown (varieties: Chestnut • Auburn)
Red (varieties: Auburn • Titian)
White/GreyHair coloringBlue rinse
Grecian Formula
Hair dye stripping
Hair highlighting
Henna
Hydrogen peroxide
Blue hairOtherDisappearing blonde gene
Fischer–Saller scale
Fischer scale
Melanocortin 1 receptorHairstylesAfro
Asymmetric cut
Bald
Bangs
Beehive
Big hair
Blowout
Bob cut
Bouffant
Bowl cut
Braid or Plait
Brush cut
Bun (odango)
Bunches
Burr
Businessman cut
Butch cut
Buzz cut
Caesar cut
Chignon
Chonmage
Chupryna
Comb over
Conk
Cornrows
Crew cut
Crochet braids
Croydon facelift
Curly hair
Curtained hair
Devilock
Dido flip
Digital perm
Dreadlocks
Duck's ass
Extensions
Feathered hair
Finger wave
Flattop
Fontange
French braid
French twist
Frosted tips
Hair crimping
Harvard clip
High and tight
Hime cut
Historical Christian hairstyles
Hi-top fade
Induction cut
Ivy League
Jewfro
Jheri curl
Kinky hair
Kiss curl
Layered hair
Liberty spikes
Long hair
Lob cut
Marcelling
Mod cut
Mohawk
Mullet
1950s
1980s
Pageboy
Part
Payot
Pigtail
Pixie cut
Pompadour
Ponytail
Punch perm
Princeton
Professional cut
Queue
Quiff
Rattail
Razor cut
Regular haircut
Regular taper cut
Ringlets
Shag (Shaggy hair)
Shape-Up
Shimada
Short back and sides
Short brush cut
Short hair
Spiky hair
Straight hair
Standard haircut
Surfer hair
Taper cut
Tonsure
Updo
Undercut
Waves
WingsFacial hairBeard
Chinstrap
Designer stubble
Goatee
MoustacheFu Manchu
handlebar
horseshoe
pencil
toothbrush
walrus
Shenandoah (Chin curtain)
Sideburns
Soul patch
Van DykeHair loss
CosmeticRemovalwaxing
threading
plucking
chemical
electric
laser
IPL
Shavinghead
leg
cream
brush
soap
Razorelectric
safety
straightotherAlopeciaareata
totalis
universalis
Male-pattern hair loss
Glabrousness
Hypertrichosis
Management
Trichophilia
Trichotillomania
Pogonophobia
Haircare ProductsBrush
Clay
Clipper
Comb
Conditioner
Dryer
Gel
Hot comb
Iron
Mousse
Pomade
Relaxer
Rollers
Shampoo
Spray
WaxHaircare TechniquesBackcombing
Crimping
Curly Girl Method
Hair cutting
Perm
Shampoo and set
StraighteningDocumentariesMy Nappy Roots: A Journey Through Black Hair-itage (2008)
Good Hair (2009)Related TopicsAfro-textured hair (Kinky hair)
Bearded lady
Barber (pole)
Eponymous hairstyle
Frizz
Good hair (phrase)
Hairdresser
Hair fetishism (pubic)
Hair follicle
Hair growth
Hypertrichosis
Trichotillomania
Categories: Facial hairHuman eye anatomyFacial featuresHidden categories: Pages with unresolved propertiesCS1 errors: external linksArticles needing additional references from February 2016All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from August 2017Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015