Main Page
Welcome to Wikipedia,
the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit.
5,626,632 articles in English
Arts
Biography
Geography
History
Mathematics
Science
Society
Technology
All portalsFrom today's featured articleBillie the white horse
The 1923 FA Cup Final was an association football match between Bolton Wanderers and West Ham United on 28 April, the first to be played at the original Wembley Stadium in London. This Football Association Challenge Cup (FA Cup), the showpiece match of English football's primary cup competition, drew a chaotic crowd of up to 300,000, far exceeding the stadium's official capacity of around 125,000. Mounted policemen, including one on a light-coloured horse (pictured) that became the defining image of the day, had to be brought in to clear the crowds from the pitch. (The match is still referred to as the "White Horse Final".) Although West Ham started strongly, Bolton proved the dominant team for most of the match and won 2–0. David Jack scored a goal two minutes after the start of the match and Jack Smith added a controversial second goal during the second half. The pre-match events prompted discussion in the House of Commons and led to the introduction of safety measures for future finals. (Full article...)
Recently featured:
Gomphus clavatus
Yugoslav destroyer Dubrovnik
Lancashire Fusiliers War MemorialArchive
By email
More featured articlesDid you know...Play media
Kennedy's speech on the space effort on September 12, 1962... that President John F. Kennedy (pictured) said: "We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard"?
... that Gujarati poet Manilal H. Patel has written poetry touching on his experiences in and around Idar, a town in the Gujarat state of India?
... that Spain abandoned El Piñal, its trading port in China, after encountering hostilities from the Portuguese?
... that in 1851, the German soprano Anna Bochkoltz-Falconi appeared at La Scala in Milan in Pergolesi's Lo frate 'nnamorato?
... that the former baggage room of Edmonds station is now used by a model railroad club?
... that 18S rDNA analysis has shown that the green algae genus Golenkinia may belong to a previously unknown sister clade of order Sphaeropleales?
... that Leo Tornikios, a failed claimant to the Byzantine throne, was publicly blinded at Christmas 1047?
... that a Royal Australian Air Force officer is the head of the UN's rear?Archive
Start a new article
Nominate an article
In the newsKim Jong-un and Moon Jae-inAt the inter-Korean summit at the Peace House in Panmunjom, the leaders of North and South Korea (pictured) agree to formally end the Korean War later this year.
American comedian Bill Cosby is found guilty of sexual assault in a retrial of a case that was closed as a mistrial in 2017.
Danish entrepreneur Peter Madsen is sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of Kim Wall.
Serzh Sargsyan resigns as Prime Minister of Armenia, following large-scale protests.
Ten people are killed and fifteen injured after a van was driven at speed along a sidewalk and into pedestrians in Toronto, Canada.
Ongoing:
Nicaraguan protestsRecent deaths:
Madeeha Gauhar
Sachio Kinugasa
Haddon Donald
Dave Nelson
Nominate an articleOn this day...April 28: International Workers' Memorial Day
Nichiren1253 – Nichiren (pictured), a Japanese monk, expounded Namu Myōhō Renge Kyō for the first time and declared it to be the essence of Buddhism, in effect founding Nichiren Buddhism.
1789 – About 1,300 miles (2,100 km) west of Tahiti, Fletcher Christian, acting lieutenant on board the Royal Navy ship Bounty, led a mutiny against the commander, William Bligh.
1941 – Presaging a campaign of genocide against Serbs of Croatia, the Ustashe movement massacred around 190 people in Gudovac.
1973 – The album The Dark Side of the Moon by the British progressive rock band Pink Floyd, entered the Billboard 200, and went on to spend a record 937 weeks on the chart.
1988 – Aloha Airlines Flight 243 suffered an explosive decompression in flight between Hilo and Honolulu, Hawaii, with one fatality as a flight attendant was ejected from the aircraft.Hertha Ayrton (b. 1854) · Penélope Cruz (b. 1974) · Regina Martínez Pérez (d. 2012)
More anniversaries:
April 27
April 28
April 29Archive
By email
List of historical anniversaries
Today's featured pictureJames Monroe (1758–1831) was an American statesman and Founding Father who served as the fifth President of the United States from 1817 to 1825. Monroe was the last president of the Virginia dynasty, and his presidency ushered in what is known as the Era of Good Feelings. An anti-federalist, Monroe had opposed ratification of the United States Constitution, claiming it gave too much power to the central government. After time as a senator in the first United States Congress and as Governor of Virginia, Monroe was easily elected president in 1816, winning over 80 percent of the electoral vote and becoming the last president during the First Party System era of American politics. During his presidency, he sought to ease partisan tensions and extend the country's reach from the Atlantic to the Pacific. He also supported the founding of colonies in Africa for freed slaves, and his declaration of the Monroe Doctrine became a landmark in American foreign policy.
Engraving: Bureau of Engraving and Printing; restoration: Andrew Shiva
Recently featured:
Raising the Flag on the Three-Country Cairn
The Annunciation, with Saint Emidius
Leica IArchive
More featured picturesOther areas of WikipediaCommunity portal – Bulletin board, projects, resources and activities covering a wide range of Wikipedia areas.
Help desk – Ask questions about using Wikipedia.
Local embassy – For Wikipedia-related communication in languages other than English.
Reference desk – Serving as virtual librarians, Wikipedia volunteers tackle your questions on a wide range of subjects.
Site news – Announcements, updates, articles and press releases on Wikipedia and the Wikimedia Foundation.
Village pump – For discussions about Wikipedia itself, including areas for technical issues and policies.Wikipedia's sister projects
Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other projects:Commons
Free media repositoryMediaWiki
Wiki software developmentMeta-Wiki
Wikimedia project coordinationWikibooks
Free textbooks and manualsWikidata
Free knowledge baseWikinews
Free-content newsWikiquote
Collection of quotationsWikisource
Free-content libraryWikispecies
Directory of speciesWikiversity
Free learning materials and activitiesWikivoyage
Free travel guideWiktionary
Dictionary and thesaurus
Wikipedia languagesThis Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently contains 5,626,632 articles.  Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below.More than 1,000,000 articles:
Deutsch
Español
Français
Italiano
Nederlands
日本語
Polski
Русский
Svenska
Tiếng Việt
中文More than 250,000 articles:
العربية
Bahasa Indonesia
Bahasa Melayu
Català
Čeština
Euskara
فارسی
한국어
Magyar
Norsk
Português
Română
Srpski
Srpskohrvatski
Suomi
Türkçe
УкраїнськаMore than 50,000 articles:
Bosanski
Български
Dansk
Eesti
Ελληνικά
English (simple form)
Esperanto
Galego
עברית
Hrvatski
Latviešu
Lietuvių
Norsk nynorsk
Slovenčina
Slovenščina
ไทยComplete list of Wikipedias
